---
layout: post
section-type: post
title: eCommerce Managers can capture more value with Dynamic Pricing
category: tech
tags: [ 'dynamic-pricing' ]
---

Almost everyone who is part of the pricing organizations in their companies or is involved in pricing in any role know the importance of pricing and how it impacts profitability and growth. All of us have seen or heard about the famous McKinsey study which cites that a price improvement of 1% increases profitability by 8%. 

There is a new tool to achieve excellence in pricing: Dynamic Pricing. We would like to call it Smart Pricing? What is it? How to leverage it? What are the challenges involved especially in retail and how to overcome them? Does these questions pique your interest? Are you interested to know the answers? That is what we will do in a series of four articles. 

Let's start by understanding the ideal process of setting price for a single product.

As a manager responsible to set the price of a product, you should look at them from three different, and generally opposing, lenses:
  
1. Economic: How much the price cost to the company?  
2. Consumer: How much consumers are willing to pay for the product?   
3. Competition: And finally, what is the price of the alternatives?   



If you just consider the economic lense, you can add a margin over the cost and set the price. This is one of the most commonly used pricing strategies called Cost-Plus Pricing. If you only use the economic lense, there are many potential disadvantages. For example, the prices you set may end up being:
  
- lower than what consumers are willing to pay   
- or higher than competition and result in loss of market share  

No one would do that, you would say. And we agree. You would also used the consumer lense too i.e., what is the customers’ willingness to pay for the product. This generally requires some sort of consumer research. Simpler methods may just ask how much a consumer is willing to pay for a product while complex methods involve trade-off techniques such as Conjoint Analysis. The result would be Value-Based Pricing; value as in how much value a consumer places on the produce. While everyone claims it to be the holy grail of pricing, it is really hard to get the value-based pricing right; It requires continuous measurement of consumer price sensitivities and perception. Value is subjective and is continuously changing in response to market inputs and personal circumstances. 

Now, let’s assume that you also used the competition lense by considering what competition is charging for the alternatives and set the final price based on what impact those prices will have on your prices and consumers’ perceptions of value.  Information about competitive prices is collected via surveys and / or mystery shopping and is used to ensure that the price is competitive.   

It would be clear by now that to set the right price - a price that extracts maximum value from consumers for you and safeguards your market share - involves a balancing act of these three lenses i.e., economic, consumer and competition.

Now, you can tell from your experience that all the pricing decision you have made, or a pricing meeting you sat in, this is what happens: you set the prices after looking through all three lenses and continuously monitor them overtime. 

As you would see in our next article, the use of all three lenses, however, significantly vary in-terms of frequency and their thoroughness. So far, we have been considering one product (or my be 10.) What if you were a retail store and were supposed to price the whole inventory? Stay tuned.

Notes:   
- The quote is adapted from the MicKinsey’s article “The Power of Pricing”   
- The three lenses framework is a concept developed by BCG. It is very intuitive tool and aids in structuring and compartmentalizing the complexities involved in a pricing decision. You can read more about this on BCG’s website.

